[MISC] Adding documentation for AWS and Azure deployment (#256)
canonical/kafka-operator: docs/how-to/h-deploy-azure.md

# How to deploy on Azure

[Azure](https://azure.com/) is the cloud computing platform developed by Microsoft. It has management, access and development of applications and services to individuals, companies, and governments through its global infrastructure. Access the Azure web console at [portal.azure.com](https://portal.azure.com/).

## Summary
* [Install Azure and Juju tooling](#install-client-environment)
  * [Authenticate](#authenticate)
* [Bootstrap Juju controller on Azure](#bootstrap-juju-controller-on-azure)
* [Deploy charms](#deploy-charms)
* [Clean up](#clean-up)

---

## Install Client Environment

> **WARNING**: The current limitations:
> * Only supported starting Juju 3.6 (currently edge)
> * Juju cli should be on Azure VM for it to be able to reach cloud metadata endpoint.
> * Managed Identity and the Juju resources should be on the same Azure subscription
> * The current setup has been tested on Ubuntu 22.04+

### Juju 

Install Juju via snap:

```shell
sudo snap install juju --channel 3.6/edge
```

Check that the Juju version is correctly installed:

```shell
juju version
```

which should show:

```shell
3.6-rc1-genericlinux-amd64

> ```

Author: In this specific case, it is actually very important since the process here would not work on other versions, even on the `3.6` track at the time of writing

First of all, retrieve your subscription-id

```shell
az login
```

After providing the authentication via web browser, you will be shown a list of information and a table with the subscriptions connected to your user, e.g.:

```shell

...

No     Subscription name                     Subscription ID                       Tenant
-----  ------------------------------------  ------------------------------------  -------------
[1] *  <subscription_name>                   <subscription_id>                     canonical.com
[2]    <other_subscription_name>             <other_subscription_id>               canonical.com

...

```

In the prompt, select the subscription id you would like to connect the controller to, and store the id 
as it will be needed in the next step when bootstrapping the controller. 

### Bootstrap Juju controller on Azure

First, you need to add a set of credentials to your Juju client:

```shell
juju add-credentials azure
```

This will start a script that will help you set up the credentials, where you will be asked:

> * `credential-name`: fill it with a sensible name that will help you identify the credential set, say `<CREDENTIAL_NAME>`
> * `region`: select any default region is more convenient for you to deploy your controller and applications. Note that credentials are nevertheless not region specific
> * `auth type`: select `interactive`, which is the recommended way to authenticate to Azure using Juju
> * `subscription_id`: use the value `<subscription_id>` taken in the previous step
> * `application_name`: please generate a random string to avoid collision with other users or applications
> * `role-definition-name`: please generate a random string to avoid collision with other users or applications, and store it as `<AZURE_ROLE>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `credential-name` — a sensible name that will help you identify the credential set, say `<CREDENTIAL_NAME>`
* `region` — a default region that is most convenient to deploy your controller and applications. Note that credentials are not region-specific
* `auth type` — authentication type. Select `interactive`, which is the recommended way to authenticate to Azure using Juju
* `subscription_id` — the value `<subscription_id>` taken in the previous step
* `application_name` — any unique string to avoid collision with other users or applications
* `role-definition-name` — any unique string to avoid collision with other users or applications, and store it as `<AZURE_ROLE>`
```

Author: Uhm, I had a look at the styleguide, e.g. [here](https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/#headings), and there are examples when rather using the ":" over the `-`. 

Why would you use `-`?

Reviewer: I don't see any directly relevant examples in our style guide. This is a definition/glossary-style fragment. I'm used to using either m-dash or n-dash for those. I don't mind using colons, but they are harder to see and navigate in this case. Here is some relevant info with references to The Chicago Manual of Style: https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/459638/should-i-use-a-hyphen-an-en-dash-or-an-em-dash-to-define-or-introduce-a-word
If you have a strong preference for colons here, I'm OK with that as long as we will do it consistently everywhere. So dash was my preference so far.

Author: > I don't see any directly relevant examples in our style guide.

In the "Dates" section, but also the document has several " * Use: ". 

Anyhow, I don't have any strong preference, and I agree for targeting consistency. Actually I found that in `h-cluster-migration.md` we use dashes, so let's go with that.

> After prompting all these information, you will be asked to authenticate the requests via web browser, as shown in the 
> outputs that will display

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you will be asked to authenticate the requests via your web browser with the following message:
```

```shell
To sign in, use a web browser to open the page https://microsoft.com/devicelogin and enter the code <YOUR_CODE> to authenticate.
```

In the browser, open the [authentication page](https://microsoft.com/devicelogin) and enter the code `<YOUR_CODE>` provided in the output. 

You will be asked to authenticate twice, for allowing the creation of two different resources in Azure.

> If everything was fine, you will be confirmed that the credentials have been correctly added locally:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will see a message that the credentials have been added locally:
```

```shell
Credential <CREDENTIAL_NAME> added locally for cloud "azure".
```

> Once the credentials are correctly added, we can bootstrap a controller

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the credentials are correctly added, we can bootstrap a controller:
```

```shell
juju bootstrap azure <CONTROLLER_NAME>
```

## Deploy charms

> Create a new Juju model, if needed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new Juju model, if needed:

```

```shell
juju add-model <MODEL_NAME>
```

> > (Optional) Increase the debug level if you are troubleshooting charms:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Optional** — Increase the debug level if you are troubleshooting charms:
```

> ```shell
> juju model-config logging-config='<root>=INFO;unit=DEBUG'

> > ```

Reviewer: Suggestion - remove quotation.

Then, Charmed Kafka can be deployed as usual. However, note that the smallest instance types on Azure may not have enough resources for hosting 

> a Kafka broker. We therefore recommend you to select some types that provides at the very least 8GB of RAM and 4 cores, although for production use-case
> we recommend you to use the guidance provided in the [requirement page](/t/charmed-kafka-reference-requirements/10563). You can find more information about 
> the available instance types in the [Azure web page](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes/overview). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a Kafka broker. We recommend selecting an instance type that provides at the very least `8` GB of RAM and `4` cores.
For more guidance on production environment sizing, see the [Requirements page](/t/charmed-kafka-reference-requirements/10563).
You can find more information about the available instance types in the [Azure documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes/overview).
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Deploy and integrate Kafka and ZooKeepe, for example:

```

```shell
juju deploy zookeeper -n3 --channel 3/stable
juju deploy kafka -n3 --constraints "instance-type=Standard_A4_v2" --channel 3/stable
juju integrate kafka zookeeper
```

We also recommend to deploy a [Data Integrator](https://charmhub.io/data-integrator) for creating an admin user to manage the content of the Kafka cluster:

```shell
juju deploy data-integrator admin --channel edge \
  --config extra-user-roles=admin \
  --config topic-name=admin-topic
```

And integrate it with the Kafka application:

```shell
juju integrate kafka admin
```

> For more information on Data Integrator and how to use it, please refer to the [how-to manage applications](/t/charmed-kafka-how-to-manage-app/10285) user guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on Data Integrator and how to use it, please refer to the [how-to manage applications](/t/charmed-kafka-how-to-manage-app/10285) guide.
```

## Clean up

[note type="caution"]

> Always clean Azure resources that are no longer necessary -  they could be costly!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Always clean Azure resources that are no longer necessary! Abandoned resources are tricky to detect and they can become expensive over time.
```

[/note]

> To destroy the Juju controller and remove Azure instance (warning: all your data will be permanently removed):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To destroy the Juju controller and remove the Azure instance (Warning: all your data will be permanently removed):

```

```shell
juju destroy-controller <CONTROLLER_NAME> --destroy-all-models --destroy-storage --force
```

> Use `juju list-controllers` to retrieve the names of the controllers that have been registered to your local client. 

> Next, check and manually delete all unnecessary Azure VM instances, to show the list of all your Azure VMs run the following command (make sure the correct region used!): 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, check and manually delete all unnecessary Azure VM instances, to show the list of all your Azure VMs run the following command (make sure to use the correct region): 
```

```shell
az resource list
```

> List your Juju credentials:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
List your Juju credentials with the `juju credentials` command:

```

```shell

> > juju credentials
> ...
> Client Credentials:
> Cloud        Credentials
> azure        NAME_OF_YOUR_CREDENTIAL
> ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Client Credentials:
Cloud        Credentials
azure        NAME_OF_YOUR_CREDENTIAL
```

```

> Remove Azure CLI credentials from Juju:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove Azure CLI credentials from Juju:

```

```shell

> > juju remove-credential azure NAME_OF_YOUR_CREDENTIAL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
juju remove-credential azure NAME_OF_YOUR_CREDENTIAL
```

```

After deleting the credentials, the `interactive` process may still leave the role resource and its assignment hanging around. 

> We recommend you to check if these are still present by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend checking if these are still present by running:
```

```shell
az role definition list --name <AZURE_ROLE>
```

> Or also use it without specifying the `--name` argument to get the full list. You can also check whether you still have a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the full list, use it without specifying the `--name` argument. 

You can check whether you still have a 
```

> role assignment bound to `<AZURE_ROLE>` registered using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
role assignment bound to `<AZURE_ROLE>` registered by using:
```

```shell
az role assignment list --role <AZURE_ROLE>
```

> If this is the case, you can remove the role assignment first and then the role itself with the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is an unwanted role left, you can remove the role assignment first and then the role itself with the following commands:
```

```shell
az role assignment delete --role <AZURE_ROLE>
az role definition delete --name <AZURE_ROLE>
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Finally, logout Azure CLI user credentials to prevent any credential leakage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, logout Azure CLI user credentials to prevent any credential leakage:

```

# How to deploy on Azure

[Azure](https://azure.com/) is the cloud computing platform developed by Microsoft. It has management, access and development of applications and services to individuals, companies, and governments through its global infrastructure. Access the Azure web console at [portal.azure.com](https://portal.azure.com/).

## Summary

* [Install Azure and Juju tooling](#install-client-environment)
  * [Authenticate](#authenticate)
* [Bootstrap Juju controller on Azure](#bootstrap-juju-controller-on-azure)
* [Deploy charms](#deploy-charms)
* [Clean up](#clean-up)

---

## Install Client Environment

> **WARNING**: The current limitations:

> > * Only supported starting Juju 3.6 (currently edge)

Reviewer 2: ??

Author: yes, the auth process is not working as below otherwise and it is a bit more clunky, requiring people to create an App on the Azure portal and use those secrets. The latter process is also not the recommended way forward. So right now we should use Juju 3.6 if we want to deploy on Azure

> * Juju cli should be on Azure VM for it to be able to reach cloud metadata endpoint.

> > * Managed Identity and the Juju resources should be on the same Azure subscription

Reviewer 2: Is this strictly neeed??

```

which should show:

```shell
3.6-rc1-genericlinux-amd64
```

### Azure CLI

Install the Azure CLI on Linux distributions by following the [Azure CLI's installation guide](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli-linux?pivots=apt).

Verify that it is correctly installed:

```shell
az --version
```

The above command should produce output similar to the following:

```shell
azure-cli                         2.65.0

core                              2.65.0
telemetry                          1.1.0

Dependencies:
msal                              1.31.0
azure-mgmt-resource               23.1.1

Python location '/opt/az/bin/python3'
Extensions directory '/home/deusebio/.azure/cliextensions'

Python (Linux) 3.11.8 (main, Sep 25 2024, 11:33:44) [GCC 11.4.0]

Legal docs and information: aka.ms/AzureCliLegal

Your CLI is up-to-date.
```

### Authenticate

> For more information on how to authenticate, refer to the [Juju documentation](/t/the-microsoft-azure-cloud-and-juju/1086) and [a dedicated user guide on how to register Azure on Juju](/t/how-to-use-juju-with-microsoft-azure/15219).

First of all, retrieve your subscription-id

```shell
az login
```

> After providing the authentication via web browser, you will be shown a list of information and a table with the subscriptions connected to your user, e.g.:

Reviewer 2: "After authenticating via the web browser..."

```shell
No     Subscription name                     Subscription ID                       Tenant
-----  ------------------------------------  ------------------------------------  -------------
[1] *  <subscription_name>                   <subscription_id>                     canonical.com
[2]    <other_subscription_name>             <other_subscription_id>               canonical.com
```

In the prompt, select the subscription id you would like to connect the controller to, and store the id 
as it will be needed in the next step when bootstrapping the controller. 

### Bootstrap Juju controller on Azure

First, you need to add a set of credentials to your Juju client:

```shell
juju add-credentials azure
```

This will start a script that will help you set up the credentials, where you will be asked:

* `credential-name` — a sensible name that will help you identify the credential set, say `<CREDENTIAL_NAME>`
* `region` — a default region that is most convenient to deploy your controller and applications. Note that credentials are not region-specific

> * `auth type` — authentication type. Select `interactive`, which is the recommended way to authenticate to Azure using Juju

Reviewer 2: that authentication scheme seems unlikely to be useful??

Author: I took this form the [juju docs](https://juju.is/docs/juju/microsoft-azure)

You will see a message that the credentials have been added locally:

```shell
Credential <CREDENTIAL_NAME> added locally for cloud "azure".
```

Once the credentials are correctly added, we can bootstrap a controller:

```shell
juju bootstrap azure <CONTROLLER_NAME>
```

## Deploy charms

Create a new Juju model, if needed:

```shell
juju add-model <MODEL_NAME>
```

[note type="caution"]
(Optional) Increase the debug level if you are troubleshooting charms:
```shell
juju model-config logging-config='<root>=INFO;unit=DEBUG'
```
[/note]

Then, Charmed Kafka can be deployed as usual. However, note that the smallest instance types on Azure may not have enough resources for hosting 
a Kafka broker. We recommend selecting an instance type that provides at the very least `8` GB of RAM and `4` cores.
For more guidance on production environment sizing, see the [Requirements page](/t/charmed-kafka-reference-requirements/10563).
You can find more information about the available instance types in the [Azure documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes/overview).

Deploy and integrate Kafka and ZooKeeper, for example:

```shell

> juju deploy zookeeper -n3 --channel 3/stable

Reviewer 2: specify an instance size suitable for ZooKeeper

juju deploy kafka -n3 --constraints "instance-type=Standard_A4_v2" --channel 3/stable
juju integrate kafka zookeeper
```

We also recommend to deploy a [Data Integrator](https://charmhub.io/data-integrator) for creating an admin user to manage the content of the Kafka cluster:

```shell
juju deploy data-integrator admin --channel edge \
  --config extra-user-roles=admin \
  --config topic-name=admin-topic
```

And integrate it with the Kafka application:

```shell
juju integrate kafka admin
```

For more information on Data Integrator and how to use it, please refer to the [how-to manage applications](/t/charmed-kafka-how-to-manage-app/10285) guide.

## Clean up

[note type="caution"]

> Always clean Azure resources that are no longer necessary! Abandoned resources are tricky to detect and they can become expensive over time.

Reviewer 2: "Always **terminate** Azure resources..."

Reviewer: Same as before about avoided terms.

```shell
az resource list
```

List your Juju credentials with the `juju credentials` command:

```shell
Client Credentials:
Cloud        Credentials
azure        NAME_OF_YOUR_CREDENTIAL
```

Remove Azure CLI credentials from Juju:

```shell
juju remove-credential azure NAME_OF_YOUR_CREDENTIAL
```

After deleting the credentials, the `interactive` process may still leave the role resource and its assignment hanging around. 
We recommend checking if these are still present by running:

```shell
az role definition list --name <AZURE_ROLE>
```

To get the full list, use it without specifying the `--name` argument. 

You can check whether you still have a 
role assignment bound to `<AZURE_ROLE>` registered by using:

```shell
az role assignment list --role <AZURE_ROLE>
```

If there is an unwanted role left, you can remove the role assignment first and then the role itself with the following commands:

```shell
az role assignment delete --role <AZURE_ROLE>
az role definition delete --name <AZURE_ROLE>
```

Finally, logout Azure CLI user credentials to prevent any credential leakage:

```shell
az logout 
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Misses an integration with COS

Author: we have a dedicated how-to, for integrating with COS: https://charmhub.io/kafka/docs/h-enable-monitoring

> 

Reviewer 2: Misses an integration with COS

# How to deploy on Azure

[Azure](https://azure.com/) is the cloud computing platform developed by Microsoft. It has management, access and development of applications and services to individuals, companies, and governments through its global infrastructure. Access the Azure web console at [portal.azure.com](https://portal.azure.com/).

## Summary

* [Install Azure and Juju tooling](#install-client-environment)
  * [Authenticate](#authenticate)
* [Bootstrap Juju controller on Azure](#bootstrap-juju-controller-on-azure)
* [Deploy charms](#deploy-charms)
* [Clean up](#clean-up)

---

## Install Client Environment

> > **WARNING**: The current limitations:

Reviewer: It would be nice to implement proper admonitions (note blocks) in this PR instead of quotation. Not a blocker.
